

### 3. Monitoring Tools


#### 3.1 System monitor / Task Manager

Primary monitor available in any graphic environment.  

Depending on your desktop environment, this may have different names,  
for example:  

**Gnome System Monitor** ( for Gnome ) ,  
**LXTask** ( for LXDE/LXQt ) ,  
**Mate System Monitor** ( for Mate ) ,  
**KSysGuard** ( for KDE ) ,  
**XFCE Task Manager** ( for Xfce )

Regardless of your desktop environment, you can also find text tools on your system  
**top** and **htop** ( text tools for the terminal )

If you have the " **top** " program running, you can click the " **h** " button  
it will show you how to use this program.  
To quit this program in side terminal click " **q** " or " **Ctrl + C** "  

----

#### 3.2  Netdata

#### 3.3.1 How it looks
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ob6-Wkb6ZBA>

#### 3.3.2 How open

From terminal you can see new service
```
$ sudo netstat -tulpn
Active Internet connections (only servers)
Proto Recv-Q Send-Q Local Address           Foreign Address         State       PID/Program name    
tcp        0      0 127.0.0.1:8125          0.0.0.0:*               LISTEN      15947/netdata       
tcp        0      0 127.0.0.1:19999         0.0.0.0:*               LISTEN      15947/netdata       
udp        0      0 127.0.0.1:8125          0.0.0.0:*                           15947/netdata  
```

Then you will know that you can open in web browser website **127.0.0.1:19999**  

#### 3.3.3 Warning 

Netdata groups processes together into one.

 I suspect that if any application from my desktop will eat more RAM, then You will see that lightdm and Xorg also will eat more RAM. But that doesn't have to be true. Just one of the applications.

Read <https://learn.netdata.cloud/docs/agent/collectors/apps.plugin>

Check file **/etc/netdata/apps_groups.conf**

Customize to your own needs,  
for example I removed this
```
X: evolution-* firefox chromium opera vivaldi-bin epiphany WebKit*
X: '*systemd --user*' chrome *chrome-sandbox* *google-chrome* *chromium* *firefox*
```

And I added 
```
firefox: *firefox* Web* Privileged* RDD*
mate-terminal: mate-terminal
steam: *steam*
```

And you need restart netdata 
```
service netdata restart
```

----

#### 3.3  Conky

The theory that you should know:

* Install **conky-all**
*  This set default configuration settings in file ~/.conkyrc
``` 
conky -C > ~/.conkyrc
```

* How run from terminal
```
conky &
```

* How close conky 
```
killall conky 
```
* In ~/.conkyrc you can find word TEXT", after this word next command in this file, will create applicationon the desktop
* " ~ " This mean home directory /home/user_name/
* Name_file with dot "." this mean file is hidden , for example: ~/.conkyrc
* In config file " # " this mean this is only comment 
* If you want improve, check <https://github.com/brndnmtthws/conky/wiki>

----

#### 3.4  GNU Krell Monitors
Is similar to Conky

* Install **gkrellm** from Synaptic package manager
* And run from terminal.  

----

#### 3.5  GSmartControl

Hard drives which support SMART technology can collect reports on the status of the hard drive.     
**GSmartControl** is a graphical user interface which allows you to view the report in a convenient way.



