

### 4. Diagnostic Tools for Hardware


####    4.1 Single Tools

* **4.1.1 Hard Drive** ( smartmontools, GSmartControl )

    * **smartmontools** - Tool for terminal  
     *" The smartmontools package contains two utility programs (smartctl and smartd) to control and monitor storage systems using the Self-Monitoring, Analysis and Reporting Technology System (SMART) "*

    * **GSmartControl**  - This is GUI for smartmontools  
    You can install **gsmartcontrol** from Synaptic package manager.


Example Error in *"Error Log"* tab:

> ATA Error Count: 2 (Note: Usually only the last five errors are stored)


When You don't have any error:

> ATA Error Count: 0 (Note: The number of entries may be limited to the newest ones)


When your hard drive not support S.M.A.R.T.:

> Warning: Device does not support error logging


* **4.1.2 RAM Memory**

    * Memtest86 
    * Memtest86+

This applications work only from live mode, e.g. live-CD / live-USB.    
I recommend using both programs, because one program will not always detect errors.


* **4.1.3 Network**

**ifconfig** - Shows network interfaces

**ip** - Shows network interfaces

```
ip addr
```

**ping** - Shows whether the data packet has arrived. Useful for checking if the internet connection is working, for example with kernel.org website.

```
ping -c1 kernel.org
```

**dig** - Displays DNS information when connecting to a website.

**mtr** - Shows route packets trace to network host.

**traceroute** - Shows route packets trace to network host.


####    4.2 Tool Kit

* 4.2.1 Ultimate Boot CD / UBCD  
            ISO with complete set of tools <http://www.ultimatebootcd.com/>

* 4.2.2 Sometimes tools are in BIOS / UEFI