

## 5. How Debug Apps


### 5.1 Run from Terminal

You can run app from terminal to check errors.


### 5.2 Run from new user account

Many Linux users complain that applications stop working after updating the application.  
This may be due to old application settings.

1. Create new user accout.

2. Log in to the new user account

3. Launch aplication

Conclusions:  

* If the application still does not work, the problem is not with the user settings.  
You have to look for the cause further.

* If the application works, the problem is related to the user's settings in /home/name_user/  
**Solution:**   
Find a way to reset or remove the settings for this application on the old user account.  
The application itself should automatically create new settings.

After testing the application, you can delete the new user account which you do not need. 


### 5.3 Run with default language

Launch the applications in the terminal like this 
```
LC_ALL='C' app name
```
Your language is ignored and the application will start in the default language.  


**Warnings:**  

* Sometimes the applications do not support this properly and may not work.

* If you share application error messages, please use this method instead of a language translator.  
 This will avoid misunderstandings and help you find identical application error messages faster.

* Using this sometimes allows you to avoids **sort** changes after changing the language.  
Example in:  
<https://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/75341/specify-the-sort-order-with-lc-collate-so-lowercase-is-before-uppercase>

* Using this sometimes allows you to optimize scripts.  
Example in:  
<https://www.inmotionhosting.com/support/website/speed-up-grep-searches-with-lc-all/>


### 5.4  How to use strace command

The **strace** command in Linux lets you trace system calls and signals. 

**Warning:**  

* The new version of strace have slightly changed options.

Examples how use:
This command will show you which libraries it is using.

```
$ strace -e openat gnome-calculator
openat(AT_FDCWD, "/etc/ld.so.cache", O_RDONLY|O_CLOEXEC) = 3
openat(AT_FDCWD, "/usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libglib-2.0.so.0", O_RDONLY|O_CLOEXEC) = 3
openat(AT_FDCWD, "/usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libgobject-2.0.so.0", O_RDONLY|O_CLOEXEC) = 3
openat(AT_FDCWD, "/usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libgtk-3.so.0", O_RDONLY|O_CLOEXEC) = 3
```

```
$ strace gnome-calculator 2>&1 | grep open
openat(AT_FDCWD, "/etc/ld.so.cache", O_RDONLY|O_CLOEXEC) = 3
openat(AT_FDCWD, "/usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libglib-2.0.so.0", O_RDONLY|O_CLOEXEC) = 3
openat(AT_FDCWD, "/usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libgobject-2.0.so.0", O_RDONLY|O_CLOEXEC) = 3
openat(AT_FDCWD, "/usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libgtk-3.so.0", O_RDONLY|O_CLOEXEC) = 3
```

Then you can search which package has this library / which package provide this library.  

* Inside system:
```
$ dpkg -S "/usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libgtk-3.so.0"
libgtk-3-0:amd64: /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libgtk-3.so.0
```

* From the database 
```
$ apt-file search "/usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libgtk-3.so.0"
libgtk-3-0: /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libgtk-3.so.0
libgtk-3-0: /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libgtk-3.so.0.2404.14
libgtk-3-0: /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libgtk-3.so.0.2404.16
```

Note how the application works in another example.  
The application searches for libraries in various places and only when it finds it looks for the next library.  

Tip:
You can collect data on a running system and a non-running system and use diff to compare the data.
  
  
### 5.5  How search help inside system

Documentation can be helpful.
It may contain information about additional debugging options. Using additional options may give more error details. 


* help  
Example how to use:  
```
your_command --help
```

* man ( manual )  
Warning:  
Manuals are in different sections and may have the same name.  
Conclusion: you can open the wrong manual.  
Tip:  
You can have colored man pages - it makes it easier to look for and nicer
it makes it easier to look for and nicer.  
Example how to color:  
<https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/how-to-view-colored-man-pages-in-linux/>

Example how to use command:  
```
man your_command
```


* yelp ( the graphical form of the man command )
yelp man:ls

Tric with "zenity" and "yad". ( you can change zenity to yad )
```
man your_command | zenity --text-info
```

* xman ( graphical textbook manager )

xman (command for terminal) --> "Manual Page" (button)  
Then you can use from menu  
"Options" --> "Search"  
or "Sections" --> select a section --> select manual  
( in menu you have to hold down the mouse button in the menu and release it in the right place )


* gman ( next graphical textbook manager )


* khelpcenter ( graphical manager of KDE documentation and Unix (Linux in this case) manuals )


* "man pages" on websites - Just note that sometimes you may have more up-to-date documentation in the system.  
And in web browser you can use " Ctrl+F " to open the search engine to search word.


### 5.6  Just information:

Nowadays, there are also more advanced tools for debugging like   
**gdb** , **Valgrind** , **watchdog**  
I am only mentioning the simplest ways.

